# Forecasting Price and Volatility of Corn Futures Contracts
https://github.com/ledermau/corn-futures-forecasting

## Background
### Futures, options, and volatility
A futures contract is an agreement to trade a commodity or other financial instrument at a fixed price at some point in the future. Futures contracts are used by both producers and consumers of commodities, as well as traders and investors to optimize purchasing and selling decisions and manage risk. The price of a futures contract typically depends on short-term changes in supply and demand. For example, demand for heating oil increases in the winter, and heating oil becomes more expensive in winter. However, this knowledge is common, and the people adapt to the expected increase in price in predictable ways, minimizing short-term volatility.

Volatility in the price of any good will generally increase drastically in response to unforeseen shocks to supply and demand. When conditions return to normal, supply and demand will reach an equilibrium and volatility will decrease. For agricultural products, Weather is the main source of unforeseen shocks to supply. We are all well aware of the effects of extreme conditions, such as the recent years of drought in California, on the supply of agricultural goods. However, more subtle effects of weather are also apparent. Currently, wetter than normal conditions in the midwest are delaying the planting of corn, and forcing farmers to switch to crops that are more tolerant of wet conditions or delaying planting until conditions improve. On the flip side, ideal conditions in a given region may lead to a surplus, driving prices lower, but still increasing volatility. The cumulative effects of current weather conditions and resulting adaptations by producers won't be fully realized in the market until several months later. If we can predict the impact of these events sooner and more accurately than other players in the market, we will have an obvious advantage, whether we are trading options on futures contracts (see below), a farmer trying to optimize planting and marketing decisions, or a consumer planning to purchase agricultural commodities.

Therefore, I propose to use recent and current weather conditions as the main predictive variable in a model of the price of futures contracts. For this project I have begun by focusing on corn, because it one of the biggest and most important crops produced in the US, demand is relatively stable, and we are currently in the midst of planting season.

#### Why forecast commodity futures volatility specifically?
Options contracts on commodity futures contracts is the main way to profit from accurately forecasting changes in volatility. Options contracts give one the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell a commodity futures contract at a certain price (strike price) at some point in the future. The price of the futures contract is closely linked to the price of the underlying commodity, but takes into account expected changes to supply and demand, such as those that might occur seasonally, or perhaps in response to changes in tax laws or government policy that are announced well ahead of time. Thus, it is predicting *unforeseen* shocks to supply and demand that will give us an advantage when buying and selling options.

An option contract can have both time value and intrinsic value. Intrinsic value is the difference between the strike price and the current (spot or cash) price of the commodity. If the spot price of a commodity futures contract is above the strike price for the option to buy that futures contract, then that option has intrinsic value equal to the difference in the two prices. For example, if you own an option that allows you to buy corn futures at $5 a bushel, and the current spot price for that futures contract is $5.50 a bushel, then your option contract has $0.50 of intrinsic value, because you could excercise the option to buy corn futures at $5.00, then immediately sell for $5.50, gaining $0.50 in profit with no risk. This is called an "in-the-money" option. An out-of-the-money option has no intrinsic value, but may have "time-value" which reflects the probability that the option will cross the strike price before the exipration date. This is why volatility is critical when trading options - the higher the volatility of the underlying asset (the futures contracts), the higher the probability that the price will cross the strike price, and so the more expensive the option contract will be (the option premium). If we can forecast the near-term *change* in volatility of futures contracts, we can profit by trading options, no matter whether the price of the futures contracts changes, and no matter if it increases or decreases. If we expect volatility to increase, we should buy options, if we expect it to tighten, we should sell them.# corn-futures-forecasting

